[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, there's a
running joke on this podcast. There's a
few of them. But one of the running
jokes is farmers are always complaining
about something. They are. They are
always complaining about something. But
you know what? It's okay. We need to eat
to live. Food is pretty important for
sort of human civilization flourishing
etc. So if the worst is that they
complain a little bit about how much
they're getting for their corn or
whatever, I'm okay with that.
>> Well, to be fair, we also know that one
of the defining news stories of the past
few decades has been the hollowing out
of America's small-scale agricultural
industry and farmers. So if you are an
independent farmer, there is a lot to
complain about, to be fair. Totally. And
again, with the caveat that it's always
tough. Very recently, a couple weeks
ago, we did the episode about surging
fertilizer prices. In that conversation,
you know, we talked about the fertilizer
to corn chart and it is not a good
ratio, right?
>> No. You know, there are many ways to
represent an industry, but if you just
wanted one, that's a very clean way.
Fertilizer prices way up, obviously,
given the situation in Iran. Corn prices
not nearly anywhere close to their
all-time highs or anything like that. So
just by at least one measure, that is a
clear squeeze. Right. So we recorded our
fertilizer episode, I guess a week or
two ago at this point. I think at the
time when we were discussing it, the
possibility that the closure of the
Strait of Hormuz could actually push up
fertilizer prices. A lot of people
weren't necessarily that aware of this
dynamic. Since then, it has gone very
mainstream and you have officials in the
US government talking about sourcing
alternative fertilizer from Morocco or
Venezuela to try to offset some of the
pain. There is some slightly good news
if you are a farmer, which is that we
are seeing grain prices start to go up.
But to your point, again, it is not at
all clear that it's going to be enough
to offset higher input costs like
fertilizer or oil. Totally. Well,
anyway, you know, we did that episode
several weeks ago about what it was like
to do agribusiness in tough markets like
particularly Venezuela, Ukraine, and so
forth. And I recall at the very end of
that conversation, and this was
obviously before the fertilizer spike,
our guests who we were talking to said,
"We got a good history lesson about
Venezuela and Ukraine." But they also
said, "At some point we should talk
about the pain that American farmers are
in right now."
>> Mhm. And so then, so that was already
the condition, it was sort of this
tease, things weren't great. Then you
get the fertilizer spike. So it's like,
it seems like a good time to have that
conversation.
>> Yeah, we work in a wait a little bit to
do that episode, but it turns out that
now is actually the perfect time for the
perfect guests. Once again, we are going
to be speaking with Jeff Kasan and Mike
Rothson. They are the founders of Agris
Academy. So Jeff and Mike, thank you so
much for coming back on All Thoughts.
Really appreciate it. First question,
you know, when we spoke to you last time
we were very focused on Venezuela and
Ukraine and your experience working at
Cargill earlier. But can you just tell
us what Agris Academy actually does?
Jeff, why don't we start with you?
Yeah, thanks for having us on again. So
Agris Academy is not a broker and
advisory business. Mike and I each have
30 years of in-depth either commodity or
involvement in the ag industry and we
decided we wanted to start an education
and consulting business. So we educate,
we have a producer practice um we
educate producers
on one level how to manage risk and
understand the future side of risk and
on another level how to merchandise like
a professional grain operation cuz a lot
of farms have become effectively
elevator managers. There There was a gap
and still is a tremendous knowledge gap
in farmers around the world. We
generally have North American students
and clients. And then we also have a
commercial business where we work with
businesses that work with various all
kinds of commodities where we help them
understand the risk, walk through how
they're consolidating that risk, how
they're managing that risk in the best
practice form in a boutique consulting
type of arrangement. So we have both
practices and a super rewarding business
kind of a second career for both of us
as we kicked it off. And we wanted to be
in a very differentiated part of the
market that wasn't well well covered.
And that's been a fantastic. We've been
in business now for 4 years and grow
very very steadily each year.
Mike, just in case anyone hadn't
listened to the episode with the two of
you before and just to sort of add on to
what Jeff was saying, just give us like
the quick your background, your bio, and
the long experience that you have had in
the ag space.
Yeah, about two-thirds of my career was
spent in Cargill doing an array of
commercial things mostly
in in risk management, trading, global
supply chain type of things. I got at
the end there after a stint actually
that Jeff and I both did through
their uh merger and acquisition and
corporate strategy group, I pivoted to
ventures.
Got hooked on that and I left Cargill in
2009, but since then I've been in some
sort of a ag tech oriented venture
capital oriented type thing in ag across
a array of topics, subsegments within
ag. Jeff and I have kicked this off for
about three and a half four years ago
now. So and one thing I think that helps
this conversation today is
>> Sure. we've probably touched through
through students or through more direct
relationships
almost 400 farms now in the US and
Canada. So, we definitely know the
vagaries of where this input situation
falls and who's positioned in
well or or or otherwise and what's
really going on when it hits the farm
gate. Yeah, so on that note, why don't
you tell us where we are in the sort of
agricultural calendar at the moment?
Because one of the things Yeah. we
learned from our previous fertilizer
episode is that fertilizer prices are
going up kind of right when people need
it most, which is the spring planting
season. But my understanding is some
people would be buying spot fertilizer
right now. Some people have already got
their supply secured. And I'm also very
curious about where we stand in terms of
planting decisions, whether people are
still making those right now or whether
or not people have already decided what
they're going to plant for the year.
Yeah, I guess I'll this Jeff and I'll
take this one on to start. So, when
we're really talking about a North
American farmer here, right? Towards the
end of the South American or South
Southern Hemisphere harvest, whether
that's generally Australia, Argentina,
uh Brazil. You know, we've already
started planting corn in places like
Texas, even into Mississippi. We have
clients that have already started. And
it was 8° in Minneapolis and we're not
even close here in the Upper Midwest.
So, a lot of the certain amounts of
nitrogen actually is put down actually
in the fall in the northern tier where
ground freezes and things kind of go
into a stasis for the winter. A fair
amount and we're really really talking
about nitrogen fertilizer here is
probably maybe the one that's giving the
world the most heartache at the moment.
Some of it's pre-bought, pre-positioned.
I would say the vast majority of what it
needs to be used in the US crop is
already either here in warehouses or on
its way.
Because you have to remember it's a long
supply chain. And if we're going to
plant in earnest starting in early April
into the what we would call the corn
belt, that product already has to be
here. So, you can see that in pricing,
the full, call it replacement price of
something like urea coming out of the
Arab Peninsula area, is not reflected in
US values. So, it's one of these you
generally as a trader would price
replacement, but full replacement is
actually not coming through at the
moment. I want to thank I don't know the
name some stone X people have been
putting that out on X kind of keeping
people appraised of what that is. So,
you're not actually getting the full
brunt because a lot of that in the
northern hemisphere is already here.
I was prepping for this and the
University of Illinois puts out a really
good series of reports. I believe under
Farm Docs Daily, I believe it's called
and the figure they threw out, at least
the one I saw, what I believe was around
75% of fertilizer has already been
purchased. Okay. You know, plus some.
Okay, well, that's I guess that that is
relatively good news that a lot of it's
already been purchased perhaps before
the spike. But, we're going to talk
obviously about what conditions are
like. We're recording this March 17th,
2026. But, let's talk about what
conditions were like February 17th, 2026
because at the end of our last
conversation several weeks ago, you're
like, you know, we should really talk
about this squeeze that's already sort
of facing American farmers. So, why
don't you take us back to February 2026
or January 2026 and just talk about the
sort of general macro conditions that
the people you're working with were
already facing prior to the fertilizer
spike.
So, let's just take you back. So, I want
to take your your listeners to how
farming works in the US and give a
little bit of an insight that is a
little bit maybe they haven't seen. So,
what has been happening and why you you
continue to hear from the farm community
about the squeeze. If you look at
prices, right? We We you some price
charts, I'm sure you'll be able to put
those in. We basically since 2016 the
futures prices have not changed. So
imagine a business since 2016 where your
output has prices have not changed.
Then on the flip side when you look at
let's call it inflation
land prices I don't have these exact
have probably doubled. Right, equipment
prices are probably up 40%. The cost of
living think about things like health
insurance
all these things right you would look at
that massive increase in prices
and look at that and see these
businesses have to be insolvent. So the
first piece of the puzzle I want to take
your listener down is land. So when you
produce and in the big markets let's
call it corn, soybeans, cotton, soft
wheat and I'll apologize cuz I'm not
going to cover every crop here. Kind of
that Midwest market we'll just use
Midwest corn. It is a tremendous driver
of land value. If you take a cost to
grow an acre of corn and let's use an
example it's $1,000 an acre to grow the
corn.
And you're in Central Illinois and
you're on an ideal parcel called a
square section nice flat black and
square
the land rent's probably going to be
half your costs.
Okay, and so obviously you can see that
you tremendous inflation in land rent or
the value of the land and a lot of land
is rented, right? And just if you look
at the capital constraints.
And the challenge we're having as
farmers with land and land rental values
is it's not trading basis it's economic
create value creation anymore. It's
trading like gold.
Okay, so the investor community has
maybe pulled back a little bit and land
prices are actually stable at a very
high value today.
But that's represents if you think about
yeah fertilizer is going up
it's actually in the last 10 years isn't
the one that's gone up as a percentage
the most, right? Land by far. And when
you get the promise that cap rates are
going to be 2% net and you're going to
get 6% a year, which has actually has
happened up until maybe the last 24
months, it's attracted a lot of outside
investors.
It's not correlated very well to the,
you know, other out of investments, so
it provides a nice portfolio effect to
the thing.
But it's gotten to such levels, right,
that on a cash flow basis, it makes very
little sense on the investment in land.
You're banking that, you know, at 2%,
you're really banking that you're going
to continue to get appreciation at 6%
forever.
And that is actually running it, in my
opinion, the law of big numbers. So, the
other thing that you need to understand
that has driven land rent, and I think
you alluded to it around small farms,
is federal crop insurance.
You may have heard about this, right,
but it's highly subsidized.
And if you think about, when you look go
out, you spend $1,000 an acre to grow a
crop, right, it would be seemed to be
quite risky. But if you can now,
particularly with some additional
subsidies, you can insure
most of the loss away
through federal crop insurance, which is
highly subsidized. One things you're I
do farm at scale in my post Cargill
life. So, very involved in this. And
think of it as a call option, where all
of a sudden you've been able to hedge
off the downside, but you continue to
run the upside for yourself.
And so, what that's done is it's really
stabilized
land values
and it's also made rents bid up to
basically no margin.
Because they'll go the farmers will try
to get bigger, right? We're looking for
economies of scale and efficiency.
And it runs like a call option. If you
graft it out, right, you lose the
downside, and you have this hockey stick
effect to the upside. So, that has
driven land rents extremely high
in a lot of places. So, you're really
getting a lot of pressure from your
number one cost, which is land price.
Number two generally be fertilizer. But
remember, as a percentage, if you've bid
the ground up, and this is probably why
you're getting a lot. If you've bid the
ground up to a zero margin, and then all
of a sudden you have a shock
to the fertilizer system,
now your theoretical margin that was
basically you bid to zero to gain scale,
and now you're $100 an acre
negative. Mhm.
Right. And then you push that through,
when you farm a thousand acres, you've
lost $100,000. You farm 200,000 200 acre
to keeps small it gets to be big numbers
because the farms have gotten big.
And so that's where you really when you
get a shock like fertilizer shock, when
you're late in the system, right? You've
already agreed on land rents, you've
agreed on
basically most of your input costs are
locked down at this point.
And all of a sudden you don't have
everything covered, it puts you into
negative pretty quick. And so margins
are very very tight. And in fact, you've
seen some of these various government
payments that have been pushed through.
A lot of those are going straight
through the system. So you think about
the farmer, right? He's using that
money, he or she actually I should say,
to pay off various pay the land rent or
make the payment on equipment or things
like that. That money is getting passed
through. That's why sometimes you hear
the farmers you say they complain all
the time like I don't even get the
benefit of this you know, bridge payment
or whatever the latest name is is
because it's passing straight through
the system, which that's why they
grumble that you know, it all goes to
the various egg co and John Deere and
and nutrient and some of these companies
that people are looking at as
investment. It almost becomes sort of a
hyper channeled monetary inflation that
this last mechanism that Jeff described
because that money basically
passes through the P&L of the producer
and then ping pongs in the system on the
input side.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Say a little bit more about land rents.
And the reason I ask is because I read I
found a random book in a used bookstore
called Trees, Why Do You Wait? And it
was like an anthropological study of two
towns, two farming towns. I think they
were actually in North Dakota, both of
them, in the late 1980s. And so a lot of
it is about how farmers make individual
decisions. And so one thing I'm very
curious about is the factors going into
whether a farmer can outright own the
land versus rent the land. Because
certainly in the 1980s in these two
small North Dakotan towns, there was a
lot of grumbling about the landowners
themselves. And I think a lot of people
in the towns were upset that they would
rent land from, you know, usually older
people who would then leave the town and
go to Florida in the winter and just
charge an extraordinarily high amount
for the right to farm that particular
piece of acreage. So I'm very curious,
what are the factors that go into
whether a farmer ends up owning or
renting? So at today's values, right?
Farms farmers generally that are in the
business own a mixture of they've have
some owned land and some rented land.
And they basically will leverage the
owned land or look at the average kind
of land cost and they'll buy strategic
pieces in today's market. The one the
piece across the fence, right? The one
that they've watched for years and
years. And so you see a lot of that. And
of course, we also have an investor
community. We also have a 10 1031
exchange community. All these solar
farms and data centers are bringing
massive amounts Oh, yeah.
>> of capital back into land. And it it's
really I mean, we have we have personal
friends that are being bought out for
development. We we watched farms trade
for solar and so you know, and they
traded tremendous values and the farmers
like to rotate that back that capital
back in. But when you look at the
returns
for very prime farmland, and I'll be
light on this and you're going to pay
$15,000 an acre
Iowa or Illinois, and I'll probably be a
little bit light basis today's values,
but for easy figuring. So,
if you want 10% cap rate, you have to
have a land rent of $1,500.
>> Mhm.
Right? That's never going to work,
right? That's going to be more than the
gross revenue. So, you end up with land
rents that have been pushed as high as
they can stand to this kind of I'm using
this example of this prime real estate
at $500. This very square, very
efficient piece. Not every piece of land
would garner even garner that kind of
rent.
So, it's very hard. You can't make the
thing cash flow on its own at today's
values. I said it has divorced itself
from its economic. So, then you're back
to renting.
Right? And then you're in that game of
securing land base, it secures across a
fishing equipment scale. And so, you
rack to, you know, renting out and quite
frankly, we do see this all the time
where rents have gotten so high, if
grandma had 100 acres that, you know,
all of a sudden she can rent out for
$500 an acre, that is $50,000.
Yeah, not bad.
>> 200 acres, right? Not bad, right? Head
to a low-tax state.
>> Yeah, yeah. And um enjoy some life. So,
you get a lot It's very hard to justify
as a farm buying land, but we still do
buy some.
Right? Strategic pieces, I think is what
generally in today's environment where
you get. But there are all kinds of
actors. Michael, I think might want to
comment here, but we often hear they say
you're not going to make any more land.
Right. And I really don't we get into
this thing I don't That's not really
true, right? The Brazilians are adding 2
million acres a year, maybe more.
The Indonesians and can add palm
plantations at a tremendous rate. There
obviously is lots of potential in Africa
still to be unlocked. And then
the technology and efficiency per acre
has just exploded. And that's actually,
if you look at that chart and say,
"Jeff, you started saying the prices
aren't any higher. You have this huge
inflationary fact. How are farmers
surviving?"
And the answer is we've had tremendous
productivity gains in farming,
particularly North American farming.
The country quietly should be very proud
of its ag sector. It's done just a It
quickly adopts things. It drives
technology
adoption at a tremendous rate. That's
lowering its unit cost, and that's how
we've been surviving for the last 10
years. If we have lower, you know, ever
squeezed by inflation, you've got to
survive in productivity.
Mike?
No, Jeff nailed it. You know, if you
look at the charts, we the blips aside,
say around the 21 drought in in South
America, and then the 22 issue with the
Ukrainian war, it if you look at it
averaged out, or even snapshot from 10
years ago to today, we're almost dead on
the same numbers. So, it's being made up
via efficiency gains in a significant
manner. And but the fact of the matter
though is, and I'm sure in in your world
you've heard this many times, the real
rate of the inflation-adjusted real rate
of commodities over time will fall. They
just do. If you chart, I think the best
way to do this is to chart gold against
anything. And you can even pick some
things that have maybe been hotter in
the moment, like cocoa last year, or
cattle recently. And if you do a
long-term chart of any basically
price-taking, very elastic
supply-response commodity, they will
fall over time. And then if you plot it
against gold, it's a stunning chart.
>> Yeah. To be fair, anything these days
looks pretty bad relative to gold. But I
certainly take the point, and to some
extent that is
the definition of progress, right? That
all of, you know, grains and proteins
and stuff get cheaper over time as we
become a wealthier society, but I
certainly take that point. Talk to us
about trade in the last year because I
can think of like a few different
dimensions. First of all, you always
have the president talk about how we're
going to get a good deal for our soybean
farmers, so I'm never quite sure where
that is. Second of all though, I imagine
that, you know, especially certain just
you mentioned equipment costs and
tariffs on certain goods, I imagine has
created a squeeze. Talk to us about the
last year and how changing trade
patterns have affected the farmers that
you work with.
Yeah, so the first thing that hit us
right obviously was the trade challenge
with China, right? Largest buyer of
soybeans in the world. And
that obviously pushes supply back into
the US and the Brazilians actually get a
different signal, economic signal, cuz
prices actually rise in Brazil, right?
Up underneath the tariff barrier, up
right just below where the US value is.
And so you get a signal into the
Brazilian market to expand
actually.
And the other thing I have a very
concern about in that is as we've worked
through it, we have sold they the
Chinese have bought just enough US beans
to keep the Brazilian honest.
That's it and that's it. Can you explain
Sorry, can you clarify what that means?
So what they do is because the
Brazilians say, "Hey, you're not going
to buy any US beans period, right?"
Their prices just keep going higher and
higher and higher. Well, all of a
sudden, I think the day that they did
finally buy a few Brazilian cargoes, I
think the Brazilian beans probably lost
a dollar a bushel US cargoes you meant,
Jeff. Yeah, US yeah. Bought US cargoes
and it sends a signal so that the US the
Brazil Brazilian beans just can't get
away too far away. The Chinese have
effectively have used us as a
>> I see what you're saying.
lever to keep that going, but so you got
expansion Brazil and of course Argentina
under the new regime doing much better
as far as and you can see they had a
all-time record wheat crop there.
And so you've got two competitors that
are doing relatively well. The other
concern I have with this is and try and
not to be political is back when we
embargoed the Russians, it sent a signal
to the world's the world community that
we were not a stable supplier.
And he he means the Soviets in the in
the
>> [clears throat]
>> yeah, 70s. Oh, you're not talking about
the
No, no, no, we're going to go way back.
Yeah, yeah, good, good. Let's good. We
love We love history on the podcast. So
wait, talk to us more about what you
meant by
All right, yeah, yeah, tell us about
that.
Yeah, so when that happened, right, that
caused a flood of capital to pour in to
Brazil and Argentina, right?
Particularly the Japanese, which were
the large buyer global buyer in the
global trade back then, but others
poured money into infrastructure to get
a an alternative. And you would do the
same thing, right? If you were you had
one grocery store that was supplied and
you and all of a sudden they said you
either do what I want or you'd go find a
secondary supplier. And that is
absolutely happening.
Foreign capital is pouring into
alternative markets. So it's a long-term
challenge in what this trade dispute has
done. That's my concern.
>> saying that history is repeating in the
sense that the proximate Okay, there's a
bunch of trade barriers, etc. going on
and so the move is internationally just
invest more in non-American farms to
expand that supply. And so you see more
say Chinese investment in Brazil and
Chinese investment elsewhere so that
they just have alternate various buyers
of alternate sources outside of the US.
Yeah, that is absolutely happening.
>> Got it. I know you said you didn't want
to get too political, but I do feel like
I have to ask. We know that farmers in
America overwhelmingly supported Trump
2.0 even though they had already had the
experience of Trump 1.0 which also
involved trade restrictions which from
what I remember were harmful to things
like soybean prices. What's the
rationale for
farmers seemingly being hurt by trade
restrictions and tariffs but still
overwhelmingly
supporting a president [laughter] who
loves tariffs in his own words.
I
can't speak for every farmer and there's
a very wide but I do think that in the
previous administration there were call
call them bridge payments
that generally generally made up a lot
of that gap a lot of that other pieces
of the puzzle on
taxes we've had tremendous challenges
with regulation in farming.
That was promised right and there you
know whether that's particularly things
around emissions
water regulation some things that became
very burdensome and so there were a lot
of reasons that not every farm we have
farms on both sides here but a lot of
farms did support the platform that
Trump ran on in the previous election
there are a number of
other things besides just the tariffs
they also the sense of fair trade access
to markets we import a lot of things
from Canada but we can't export a number
of things to Canada milk is one of the
dairy products I think we're focused on
Graham but there are significant capital
investments in this country and
everything on the livestock and protein
side
out there also that we haven't even we
haven't even broached. And and another
example the EU obviously the EU has a
protected grain market like no place on
earth so one thing I can say if given
the opportunity 99 plus percent of
row crop producers in the United States
would love nothing more than to just
remove all
trade regulation trade barriers shall
say tariffs or otherwise to to global
grain production because they would do
extremely well in environment like that.
Yeah, American farmers are playing to
the rules. They didn't get a say at the
rules. They'll play to the rules that
they're given. But if you let them
loose, they are tremendously productive.
We have also the gifts that this country
has with waterways, transportation, rule
of law is very important, private
property ownership rules, things that
make the US
little less the Canadian producer
extremely competitive in the world.
Evermore we continue to get more and
more government intervention and
we've been through it before and we'll
deal with it as it comes.
What about our labor costs a factor or
is it mostly the type of crops that you
deal with? Is it so mechanized that
labor is just not a particularly
important dial or factor of the cost?
In that example thousand Yeah.
>> dollar an acre cost labor is a tiny
amount of that in grain farming has
become extremely efficient. But in all
the crops that you think around
vegetable farming, right? Things that
are very labor intensive, it's
absolutely an issue, right? And
immigration, robotics, all that you see
more and more, right? As labor costs
rise. Yeah, it's a huge issue in certain
crops and quite frankly crops that
consumers are more familiar with
day-to-day, right? A consumer doesn't
eat a soybean or crunch on a hard piece
of corn, right? But when it becomes
strawberries, lettuce, carrots, right?
It's a still a very labor intensive
operation. And the the livestock side is
another good example I think where labor
costs are squeezing and certainly part
of the immigration issue, too.
My son likes raw corn, by the way. I
guess he doesn't eat
>> Raw corn? Yeah, well, he Like directly
off the cob?
>> Yeah, yeah, he does just fresh corn
pre-cooked. I mean, it's not the not
dried corn. Not dried corn.
>> Sweet corn.
>> Yeah, yeah, sweet corn. Oh, sweet corn.
Okay, yeah.
I was very confused.
>> want to bite into a
fully cured 15% moisture
>> Absolutely. He would not do it today.
But Tracy, have I told I I've probably
told this story. Did I ever tell you
about the time I talked to the palm oil
magnate at the top at the night club at
the top of the Petronas Towers. I was at
this really noisy night club at the top
of the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur.
And I met him there.
>> Oh, oh, you have? And there was this
palm oil magnate. And it was super loud
in there. And he was like, "Joe, let me
tell you why palm oil is just the best
business in the world." He's like, "It
goes into everything. It goes into
women's lipstick. It goes into this. It
goes into that. And and this is like the
key thing relevant." He's like, "Because
of like the nature of the trees, at
least as of the time, it was very
difficult to mechanize. And so unlike
say
there is always going to be cuz labor is
going to was such an important part of
picking palm oil." He's like, "Malaysia
will always have this cost advantage
over richer countries." And so yes, he
was very he was I mean, now they're
talking about mechanized ways of
harvesting
>> I figured they are making it more
mechanized and robots will eventually
come for it. But at least at the time,
he was really giving me the hard sell on
palm oil is the future. And yet you came
back from your trip without having And
yet I did not buy into it. Yeah. Okay,
so one of the things I want to ask is
how farmers actually make the decision
on what they're going to plant each
year. I'm sure some of it is just based
on their own experience and the type of
land they have, but it also seems like
there are all these other factors that
they would be considering future prices
that they could get for things or input
costs. Maybe certain crops, for
instance, consume or need more nitrogen,
which is now going up in price. So what
are all the individual factors that go
into making those decisions every year?
Well, as the farmer of the group, I
guess I'll have to take this one. So,
I'd say obviously economics. We do look
economics, although I think farmers tend
to look a little bit more backward than
forward because you really don't know
until you have yield, right? And so,
fundamentally you can only take
forward-looking economics so far. Crop
rotation is very important, disease
breaking, equipment utilization, storage
utilization, and it also depends in the
you know, what are your choices? Certain
parts of the country have a lot more
choices. We've kind of left out cotton
has been severely depressed. Cotton is a
very flexible crop in a sense that you
could replace that with a soybean,
potentially a little bit of corn.
Peanuts is a big crop in the Southeast.
Highly government regulated. So, what
you switch to crop insurance is a huge
piece of the puzzle. What can What
levels can you insure? You may grow a
crop that doesn't look profitable, but
because of the levels you can guarantee
revenue.
Those things got But you don't You don't
get tremendous switches in most places
because you just if you go all corn, we
saw a lot more corn last year, actually.
You can suddenly find yourself in a
severe storage problem because you trade
a 50 50 bushel an acre soybean for a 200
bushel an acre
corn. And you actually have that in the
far west even as we speak. There is
grain piled across Minnesota, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska because
we had a lot more corn on corn acres
rotation and we outran our storage.
And we had a great crop.
So, this is something else I wanted to
ask about, which is like the decision to
put something in storage and then when
you actually decide to sell it because
this is again one thing I hadn't really
realized was such a thing in the US
until I read that book. But also, it
seems to be
relevant again today because we are
seeing grain prices start to go up a
little bit given the Iran situation. And
so, I'm reading stories on Agweek and
places like that saying that farmers are
all rushing to sell all the corn that
they had in storage from last year.
Corn really moves for our grain really
moves for two main reasons in terms of
having to move. As Jeff already alluded
to, storage is one
and cash needs is the other. And the
real value of storage space in North
America is that first sort of 90 days
into harvest and
into the harvest and afterwards.
After that, it becomes again more of a
personal decision, a personal marketing
decision. There's an approach we teach
that forces producers to think more an
actual grain merchandising and risk
management group like, you know, the the
group we work for in the past would
think. So, their their actual drivers
for that, economic drivers, might change
than the way they did it before. But
yes, flat prices that are better are
just that and it will bring grain to
market, especially when we were seeing
prices we haven't seen for quite some
time. And as Jeff said, we had a really
good crop and a lot still sitting
around. So, yeah, in the last month, a
tremendous amount of physical grain has
moved to hit these higher prices.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Who makes a lot of money when there's a
ton of supply and everyone wants
storage? Do those storage rents go way
up at that time?
Yeah, it's a that's a great question.
Farmers ask us that all the time. So,
yes, basis more valuable, right? Up to a
point. And then that point, you know, it
keeps the value of space keeps rising
till it it grabs an incremental space.
And the next thing you know, you the
easy space gets filled first, and then
space value gets higher, and then the
next thing you know, you're filling a
salt mine somewhere, and then you get
out to the far west where you have
colder drier they actually pile the
grain and cover it millions and millions
and millions of bushels which kind of
caps out the value of space.
So, that really starts to set that value
of space, but yes, it does flex over
time. And now farmers have invested in a
lot of space and one of the things we
teach is how to utilize that space like
a grain elevator and how to to earn like
a merchandiser. That's a piece of big
piece of what we do in our farmer
producer business.
>> Interesting. So, I'm zooming out for a
second. I'm looking at a chart from the
American Farm Bureau Federation. 2015
was a very high year for farm
bankruptcies overall. And we're you
know, it's not at the levels of like
when they were doing the Farm Aid
concerts in the 1980s or so forth, but
it's clearly ticked up the highest it
looks like certainly since the pandemic.
When a farmer declares bankruptcy, how
did they wind up in that situation? I
mean, we everyone's facing the same
stresses, but what had to have happened
to kick off that sequence of events such
that a farmer files a chapter 12?
Yeah, in our farm management practice
which is a part of this business, we see
a lot. So, let's be First off, you got
to dig deeper in those numbers. I would
venture to guess that the dairy
numbers are in there and we have a
structural change in dairy
to these mega dairy efficiencies that
have that business model has taken over.
And so, it's put intense pressure on
even the mid-size dairy farm. So, you've
got a lot of that and that's that's a
very
emotional type of farming I want to say
because you're there every day with
those with that livestock. It's hard to
explain to somebody who
who hasn't been with an animal since it
was born and is with it for seven or
eight years. It's to get forced out that
way is really challenging. We don't see
it in the grain side. A lot of it has to
do with the payments, right? It's been
tight and you're watching working
capital. And farms are different, but we
don't see a lot of chapter 12. You don't
see it. We're not seeing farms being
forced to sell. We're not seeing
wholesale equipment sales
>> Okay. that are bankruptcy driven in the
grain side in most markets. I think rice
has been particularly difficult. We're
not huge into that kind of Arkansas
area. I think cotton has been very, very
challenging. We really haven't seen a
credit contraction, right? Which is what
you would think would happen from
working capital. A lot of working
capital is provided through the Farm
Credit System, right? The quasi um
backed agencies. And we have very
rarely, even in the last cycle, cuz
they're renewing their operating loans
here in the last couple of months, there
has been a very few pullbacks. And and
quite frankly, it's still very
competitive where you can borrow money
at
call it 6 and 1/2 to 7 and 1/2% for
short-term versus a government treasury
at 3 and 1/2, 3.6. So, as investors,
right? That's a good spread. And there
still is a lot of equity in farms. It's
in the land. So, you can get farms that
get tripped up through expansion. And
you have equity, but it's locked through
into the land values. And that's that
can be where you get into trouble. You
just get short-term operating capital
squeeze, but the banks are not, to the
best of what we see, are not really
heavily pulling back on operating notes
at this point.
>> Yeah, goes back to the land point that
we made earlier. And and equity. And
when you compare now to the farm aid
stuff in the late '80s, we have much
better balance sheets at the producer
level now versus then. And also
remember, you had interest rates in the
upper teens, right? So, it's just very
different now. There's obviously there's
a squeeze, but it's not remotely like
that.
So, I realize we're already running out
of time and we could kind of keep going
for ages, but just to get back to the
current situation,
what are you hearing from your network
of farming contacts right now about how
they're feeling about the Iran
situation? Cuz as we mentioned in the
intro, there are these push-pull factors
that are going on right now.
Yeah, we um as a you know, as we connect
with the farmers in our my own farm.
First off, we've had some opportunities
to hedge off some grain for new crop at
some relatively interesting levels and a
lots of our clients have taken a time to
at least get some grain sold on that
>> forward sold the upcoming crop.
>> We can We can forward sell the upcoming
crop. We've taken advantage of it on the
old crop, right? Which we talked about a
little bit earlier. We obviously are
very concerned about the fertilizer
prices on the pieces we don't have
locked up.
And you know, in that constant squeeze
across all inflationary. I think the
inflation is the piece that drives us
I'll call I'm going to call us being the
proverbial us because we don't feel like
we're in control. A number of suppliers
in the ag sector operate in oligar-
oligar-
oligarchy oligar-
Oligopoly, yeah.
Oligopoly, right? And so you'll hear a
lot about whether that's seed,
fertilizer, particularly in cattle
processing, um and you know, that's a
big issue. We're very aware of it. When
you put in trade barriers, you actually
isolate other competitors out, right?
That are probably critical to keeping
costs down at the farm. So farmers feel
very threatened about the supplier
environment that they're in and probably
with good reason. I've never seen
anything personally illegal go on, but I
see lots of behavior that is legal to
operate in that oligopoly environment.
And so it's um it's really disconcerting
if you think about running a business
where your suppliers are two, you know,
there's what, three, maybe four seed
companies left genetics.
Your processing the cattle, which by the
way, you know, at least on the calf side
is at all-time record profits, but
they're still concerned because you only
have really less cyclically three or
four buyers. Hogs are highly
consolidated, chickens very
consolidated, fertilizer. So, that's
probably one of the angst we have.
Policy is another big piece of the
angst, because we're
I think without these payments, we don't
know whether those are going to come or
not.
That's floated a lot of farms in the
last year.
And so, that's very disconcerting, cuz
you could change administration to
administration. You can't hedge that or
know what the numbers are going to look
like. Yeah. Lots of uncertainty.
>> But, do you have one piece of advice for
your client like right now is right now
in this environment? Like, okay, that
that's what they're telling you. What
are you telling them to do right now?
Well, one thing we as we already talked
about is
look at these gift horses in a good way
and hedge a little bit off for next
year, cuz we we are at we are at new
crop levels. We describe new crop as
next fall in in trader language at
numbers that we haven't seen for a
while. So, let's go ahead and take
advantage of that and see what happens.
As you folks probably very well know,
crude and corn are incredibly
correlated. They I think they have an R
squared north of 95. With some of our
very tight relationships, we're having
producers sit in their easy chair on
Sunday nights when the overnights open
after a weekend of crazy news and
everyone's doom scrolling and crude's up
20 and corn's up 20 cents following it.
Maybe if you only have a little bit
hedged for next year, go into your
account and hedge a little more. So,
we've been
taking advantage of some of these wild
market swings off in the weird times.
For whatever reason, the last couple
Sunday nights have been absolutely wild.
Yeah. So, just pay a little bit more
attention and win these little battles
along the way. We refer to it as winning
the details.
Take advantage of those things while you
can. Yeah, I think what we teach in
class, right, is around discipline.
Right, the discipline and heart are
really good. So, understanding your
actual risk, um managing that risk off
best as your risk profile, staying
steady, right? Things that people who
trade commodities for a living do and
understand. And then there are huge
amounts of physical details around cash
management and storage and things like
that that are still out there. So,
that's really where we we bring out the
disciplined approach around this and
becoming risk managers. We always one of
the first things we say is that if you
want to make a jump as a producer, you
become a risk manager to the farm
instead of a speculator. And that's how
the biggest companies, right? They have
risk managers. Whether they're commodity
companies or people who use a lot of
commodities, right? They have people
that risk manage and they focus on
margin. And so, we've really tried to
bring that discipline through our
classes and through our one-on-one
relationships out to the farm, which
never had access to this type of
education. That's where our business
came in. Disciplined thought process
that their buyers use. If you look at
all the companies that have been around
forever in the commodity side, they're
all hyper-disciplined. They all share
the same culture and approaches and and
their hedgers. And and we we try to have
that
mindset bleed into the practice of our
students and clients.
All right. Jeff and Mike, thank you once
again for coming back on Odd Lots. Truly
the perfect guest at the perfect time.
So,
>> [music]
>> really appreciate it. Yeah, thanks for
having us. Appreciate it. It's fun to
hear that, you know, we're in our New
York City apartments like doom scrolling
Sunday night futures and we're all doing
the same thing. The farmers out in the
middle of the country and those of us
who are all we're all looking at that
open. But um thank you so much. That was
a blast. You bet. [music]
Thank you.
>> [music]
>> So, Joe, that was really really
interesting. And I feel like even though
we spoke for quite a while, we we've
still only scratched the surface. It's a
big topic, right? But one of the things
that stood out there was the importance
of land. Yes. Land costs and also
competition from abroad because I hadn't
really thought about that before. We are
used to hearing the phrase that buy
land, they're not making any any more of
it, but if you're deforesting Brazil or
Indonesia, it turns out you are making
more farmland. No, I thought that was a
great point. There's been a lot of
interest in reporting including from our
Bloomberg colleagues about specifically
Chinese agriculture investments in
Brazil and how much they're building up
that linkages. And so obviously still
today as they put it, you know, Trump
tries to
make some soybean sales and the American
farmer sort of has it they can play each
other off, discipline the Brazilian
farmer by buying some American beans,
etc. But
there is this really big farm ecosystem
that continues to grow, also continues
to get very productive. They're using
some of the top of the line Chinese
equipment which we know is very good.
And yeah, that's going to continue to
undercut the American exporter. Do you
think the farming evolution and the
productivity revolution is going to be a
good analogy for AI for everyone else
for the white collar working class?
>> it's I don't know, probably not, but it
is interesting.
There was actually something out
literally today. I think some hedge fund
put a thing like trying to push back
some of the doom scenarios and they're
like, oh, you know, we used to be so
much agriculture based then it went
away, but now we have other jobs, etc.
But that was like one sector, you know,
like I'm not very like I'm not very
comforted by any historical analogy
where the technology just applies to one
sector. They're like, oh, like bank
tellers didn't disappear after the ATM
was introduced. That was one technology.
>> about the whole knowledge economy.
>> like the entire the human brain being
replicated. So I'm not No, I'm not that.
I don't take too much comfort from that.
All right.
>> bad and it's tough for farmers.
>> Yes. No, that's my that's my point. My
point is that the experience of
small-scale farmers could be coming to
all of us because it's it's just going
to be about scale and capital investment
and how big your tractor is. I know. All
right. Shall we leave it there? Let's
leave it there. This has been another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow Mike and Jeff. They're at Agris
Academy. Follow our producers, Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen Armon Dash at Dash
and Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks. And
for more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
for a daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when [music] we do these agricultural
episodes, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
[music] platform. And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad-free. [music]
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]